okay thank you everybody this is the
town of vanover board of Finance meeting
for Wednesday March
27th um we'll go ahead and start by
reciting the Pledge of Allegiance pledge
allegiance to the flag the United States
of America and to the Republic for which
it stands one
nation indivisible Liberty jce for
all thank you uh we'll move on on to our
next agenda item which is public speak I
don't see anybody from the public Eric
do you on your screen uh no there does
not appear to be anybody here from the
public
okay all right how come they don't love
us we're meeting too often for them they
don't we delute the thing here sorry um
okay we'll move on to agenda item three
which is changes or additions to the
agenda does anybody have any proposed
changes or additions to the agenda for
[Music]
tonight I'm off set okay hearing none
we'll move on to Old business the first
one is 4 a review the policy for AES
Capital expenditures I don't know if we
have any new on that so I can speak to
that Mark um you know I had a chance
last week after the CIP meeting on
Thursday I met with Shannon for a bit we
sat down and talked about sort of
conceptually where we were and set up a
meeting for tomorrow night uh at my
place hopefully we'll have a couple of
hours to sit down and actually draft uh
we didn't make progress on language we
just sort of talked about you know where
we were and everything because it's been
a while so excuse me with last week
having both Board of finance and board
of n CIP meetings no I didn't have a ton
of time so we're hoping sounds like
progress in re-engagement so that's
something right yeah we're hoping to
make some real progress tomorrow night
okay anybody have anything else on
that the the only thing I would say to
that is that uh the audit that we are
submitting um does assume that the
$112,000 Surplus from AES will be put in
that Capital account so um that was
based on the board of
Finance agreeing to the earlier amount
even though the amount has changed so
just as a point um that's and I know
they haven't given us anything we don't
actually have the money but that is what
was that is what the audit is is
basically claiming so I think as we file
it we probably out a figure out how to
actually get that money um you know Eric
remind us how that that was decided
you're saying the board of Finance
decided that so the board of Finance if
you remember back last last summer when
the uh AES wanted to do the parking lot
okay what was agreed was that they
transfer a check okay and you requested
$130,000 they originally wrote a check
for like
124 MH which they then took back because
they didn't actually have 124 to
write um and the the final number I
think was like 112 and I thank you for
remind I get it I just you know I wanted
to make sure right it was because it was
the par and it had just to clarify it
was that right that we weren't just
deciding we were GNA transfer the
balance and the only other thing I
wanted to add Mark um hopefully with Rob
talking to Shannon tomorrow night I
think we had made progress at that last
meeting discussing it where hopefully
you know a lot got discussed a lot of
points were made and I know Shannon now
understands that it there was going to
be money put in it besides just the
transferring money so I'm I wish you
luck and thank you for taking that on
hopefully it'll be a productive meeting
that's all thank you the only thing I
want to add to that is and I could be
missp speaking so just bear with me but
um I have a me memory from a discussion
it was either at the CIP meeting or just
after because Celeste was there and
Shannon was there and I'm not sure they
have 112 anymore Eric do you recall what
I'm talking about I feel like it was a
slightly lower
figure uh as far as I know that was the
last number the auditor gave me all
right was that that was what their
Surplus was okay I'll have to which is
not to say they didn't decide to do
something else with their Surplus
they could have but that's not what what
was in the audit yeah I don't know that
they've spent money per se I I'm not
really clear on this but for some reason
I had a different number in my head a
just not not a huge difference but um
you know more like 103 or something like
that uh so that's something I'll have to
nail down I'll talk to shanm night about
that too uh I I can't remember it was
Celeste or her who mentioned that to me
uh last week but it may be because we're
putting in a 100,000 is the idea uh from
the town side and the idea was that they
had 10 something on their side and then
we were discussing at that CIP meeting
we talked about the project that could
be 200ish and that would cover so that's
that's the those are the figures I had
in my head but I I honestly can't recall
well enough now so I'll let it right
I'll let you guys know what I know when
I know it um but I think the 112 may be
a touch
High any other comments or questions on
that just a clarification um they will
get the 100 and whatever put into the
capital fund plus $100,000 in this
year's budget added to it okay I just
want to make sure I understood that
correct I thought that they were giving
aund and something back to the town and
then going forward we were to add
$100,000 but that's basically it because
the controls the account so they'll have
to they'll have to transfer the money to
the town and then into that account
right grand total would be like 200
though is the point yeah next fiscal
year once we had a chance to to move
that money in okay I just want to make
sure I understood that thanks and then
Mark is it they still of course want to
go forward with the parking lot
hopefully they'll be or are we not
talking about that when we get to CIP
yeah okay all right yeah yeah I don't
know I don't know that that may be a
second on the priority
list okay no
problem other
questions okay well I guess let's move
on to item 4B which is review of budget
to
actual um we have this in our packet um
I have not had a chance to even open
this till tonight but I don't know if
anybody has any specific questions Eric
you have anything needs to be
highlighted uh no at this point
overall you know we're in good shape we
don't really have any specific issues so
so I'm budget wise right now I don't see
any issues with us through the end of
the year
so go ahead bill just say so Eric is it
normal that we would be at this point um
in the year or in the budget still short
you know $2 million in tax revenue
property tax revenue a million dollar in
government revenues I'm just looking at
the short the shortages so far like does
that we fully intend to get all that by
yeah so the state is notoriously late
for supplying the full Freight for uh
ECS or educational cost sharing and that
is that is the bulk of what we get from
the state so usually this time of year
we're still a million short um on ECS
funding um so yeah that's that's not at
all surprising they've paid us basically
half of what they owe us for a year we
will get that before the end of the year
um but they'll take their uh their time
in in sending that to us and with the
property taxes though like you would
think they're due in July right and here
we are in almost other quarterly some of
them Bill no so so the way it works is
automobile taxes are one time a year got
um real estate is quarterly so that's
four times a year so we expect a very
significant fraction of taxes you know
are due in the month of April yep I
forgot about that okay thank
you um can I Mark real quick um with
with I backing up to I apologize I
missed
um I was looking at the the agenda and I
don't see that we have CIP liazon on
there can we add
it we can just do it under board open
discussion I suppose what's that ER
that's actually under under item nine
liaison reports we normally deal with
that oh oh oh sorry I see it now yep my
fault
okay
good other questions about the budget
today actual for actuals to budget year
to
date and remember we budget fairly
closely overall so usually by the end of
the year roughly onethird of the line
items that we have the individual line
items are over but overall if we look at
Department budgets we're in pretty good
shape across the board with Department
budgets so I'm not seeing any major
shortfalls that we're going to need to
account for um you know in this budget
other than we will be over in the
transportation drivers um they'll
definitely be some areas where we're
over but overall in the budget we're in
good shape and we can absorb those
overages and still be in the black for
the year yeah I mean some of our stuff
like sand and salt and DPW overtime are
probably under significant right right
so yeah I'm looking at that right now on
snow
removal like 52 54 this year anyway yeah
for this year yep we could still have a
snow event we shouldn't talk too loudly
well no discussion earlier and believe
it or not we have used an awful lot of
salt this year because the the funny
things is the snowier years don't
necessarily correspond to when we use
the most snow that we had a lot of rain
events with freezing yeah we have more
icing so it's it's kind of an odd odd
thing in
that yeah I hadn't thought about that
it's that's interesting good point all
right okay any other questions about the
budget okay hearing none I guess we'll
move on the next item is check register
same thing any specific questions on
that
use little big items Big Ticket items
are
there town of Mansfield what's that Eric
is that the uh waste or health dep town
of
Mansfield
uh there's two things we pay the town of
Mansfield for the first is they are the
fiduciary for the Eastern Highlands
health district that's with the majority
of the money we pay we also pay them a
small sum because they manage some of
the programs for Mid neok which is our
hazardous waste Consortium so you'll see
two payments to town of Mansfield for
that most of the money is would be the
health
district art and Luchi LLC
so Bart that's Barton and Le Judas they
are
the
yeah don't ask me why but that's how
they pronounce it that is the
engineering firm we
hired to uh do the route
316 connectivity study ah okay um and
Grant application that is that is
actually funded um that is a
congressional or a legislative grant
that we got to pay for for that so
that's not I mean we're paying it but
but it's not we you know that's not tax
dollars covered yeah okay got it and and
what is just curious what is
spring what is what there's a line item
it calls out Spring spr iing right under
Tuttle Robert Tuttle that's only 14,700
but I'm just I'm just curious what is
what is oh that that goes to that's
basically Health
uh
um
payments why that's listed as that I
don't know but I was just curious when I
saw the word spring I was like oh spring
cleanup like spring I wonder if the note
they put in there had to do with the
spring payment or something is it it's a
monthly payment right no it is spring it
it's probably should put Q2 Q3 or
something like that you know yeah so
that is one of their so that is
basically health and benefits payments
from the
town that's what that is spring is I
think that's the the organization that
actually manages the ram
Consortium
um why it doesn't say Ram Consortium I
don't know the one below it is the
monthly payment to AES and the a below
that is our uh our monthly payment to
Ram yeah um AES is the same payment
every month Ram they give us basically a
schedule a year ahead of time which is
based on past experience when they need
what money so each each month the Ram
one varies every month but the AES we
give them the same amount every month
because you know yeah just a weird it
was just a weird one that's M the name
of that's all I was asking about yeah
yeah no that should be renamed and that
should say something like I don't know
healthc care Consortium or something
like that
yeah I have a related question Eric just
because you've mentioned before I know
she's part of the treasurer you know
Works in is she you've mentioned before
she's in Florida has she been checking
in is she working remotely
is yeah she's working remotely oh okay
um so we do have contact but there she's
just you know I mean she's able to take
meetings if she has to or yeah you can
always you know I we still talk to her
and and go back and forth and she still
you know reconciles remotely so I mean
she can function it's easier when she's
local but but it's functional having her
in Florida no gotcha I mean I know she
doesn't want to hang on and be the
treasurer forever and we've said we're
lucky to have her so I just wanted to
make sure she's still in contact and if
she needs to I mean that's the great
thing about remote you could be anywhere
I was in Vermont on vacation did one of
these meetings so okay thank you yep
another just curiosity uh what is
Cargill Inc just curious oh perill
that's who we get salt from oh that's
the salt bill
thanks
Y no that's probably a fairly large
payment yeah I remember that one though
yeah
y any
others okay I guess we'll go on to audit
review so Eric you know my understanding
is you know we've approved the budget
this is going to be submitted to the
state obviously we still have the open
item of the corrective action plan which
we're working on scheduling a meeting to
discuss with the various entities
including the uh the board of San and
the uh Board of Education the treasurer
Etc yep that's pretty good summary Mike
is planning on I think submitting the
audit uh this week I signed the uh the
audit review
notes uh the endover representation
letter
um and forwarded to Cheryl to
sign um and usually the the school signs
a separate
management uh letter um also to the
auditor so hopefully that will be
accomplished in the next couple days and
Mike can hit send on the audit because
that's important right Eric because
March ends the end of I knew we were all
hoping to get it submitted right by the
end of March March and that that comes
this week and with the holiday and all
so hopefully plan Friday yeah I know
Monday's the 1 so you feel like that's
all in line like you said and hopefully
Cheryl sign I mean I know we voted it in
at the last meeting or
whatever right Mike sent it to me this
morning I printed it out signed it sent
it to Cheryl so all she has to do is
sign it
yeah so I don't think it'll be a problem
on the town end and there's no reason
the school can't couldn't have turned
their end around today
also
okay sounds good I know that March 31st
is this week that's all
okay yep
okay no other questions or comments in
that item we'll move on to 5A which is
the new business DPW equipment schedule
get out your magnifying glasses and you
can look at schedule I need my printed
in so I think Jay did send you this
before separately in in Excel so you can
see it you know in in big screen but I
ask that this gets put in the packet
because what happens is every year or
two the equipment schedule and the
equipment request list for Public Works
gets updated and then it gets shopped
around to CIP Board of Selectmen and
Board of finance and what CIP does is
reviews the request list and say yes
that makes sense or no it doesn't so
they've submitted it to CIP CIP has
agreed to endorse the Capital Equipment
plan um and so then it goes on to you um
and um that's important because future
decisions on what equipment we make or
by you know get based off of that um and
so what I've been working with Jon is to
put it all in more
coherent uh set of data than he was
presenting before he had all the
information he just was presenting it in
a
very non easy to understand so I think
we've reduced it to something that's
easy to review and understand you know
what the plan is and why so I I don't
think you need to make any action on
this there's there's nothing you need to
do this is just for your information as
the board of Finance so you can kind of
keep it in the back of your head and
know you know in a few years what you're
likely to see for an equipment
request Eric when when will the um I'm
I'm sorry I forget this but when will
the referendum be on the new
mower that's a good question so I
working furiously with the town's
attorney to get all the things that we
need to get together for the public
meeting because there's two lot line
adjustments there's at least
uh um three ordinances that the board of
Selectmen you know want to put through
um and then there is the grant request
for the AES field and uh you know and
then the request for the mower so
there's going to be a lot at that
meeting you know I'm I honestly don't
have everything
collated um I'm missing a couple of
things oh and the you know so I've got
most of it um but I don't have all of it
and the board was kind of adamant that
they only wanted to have one meeting so
I'm gonna hope that at the next Board of
selectman meeting we can identify a date
um and I've talked a little bit about
the town clerk uh for that and then also
at the next meeting the board of
Selectmen has to officially set the date
for the annual Town budget
meeting um so that should be early
May because Eric I know we've been
talking about this for months so it's
just and I I'm not putting any blame at
all but it just will help us as a board
making decisions you know that are
current with the budget you know we want
to have the input we've had plenty of
meetings and costs and you know things
that are going to be this year like you
said there's there's multiple things
that will help us make decisions so I
would hope like when you say it's after
the next Board of selectman meeting
isn't that usually mid-mon or like the
10th or something yeah next Board of
selectman meeting is the eth I don't
decision at that meeting when they want
to schedule it because I would hope I
mean because we're going to be stuck
we'll all I mean obviously we'll be
having budget meetings moving forward so
that was a really good question so
hopefully they prepared be prepared
since there's weeks before that to maybe
set a date that next week or something
or
whenever yeah we'd have to do a couple
weeks out because we still have to do
public notice and a bunch of things but
I can see it doing it more towards the
third week in April um that would
certainly be my goal is to get that done
so we have that meeting and then have
the budget
meeting um well we need some time in
before you know it's just going to push
everything back if everything's been
pushed back a year and we don't have the
stuff in our
hands I want to have enough time to
ponder what the public says if we have
to go but I I understand what you're
hoping for
but because of the way we're budgeting
now where we're putting money in
permanent
funds we're basically spending money at
this point that has already been
allocated up to this point
so I don't think that hear you're saying
my my fear or uneasiness with it is
we've made decisions and never really
brought it to the public meeting so I
just want to have their input on it I
agree with you that we've decided How
we'll fund it and we'll put certain
amounts in you know and and now there's
going to be like you said we're going to
be looking at this Public Works
projection and the the equipment and
that'll be a time cycle I know it's
different things but
um yeah I mean I especially the big
items like the tankers and the trucks
and the this and the that you know you
want to I I know that they needs or
whatever you know so some things are
going to dictate that we can't have the
public input because we're going to have
to do it if something just breaks down
and doesn't work anymore and the town
needs it but that's that's my point
understood
thanks any other questions on those
documents it's actually a good layout
looking at it so kudos to you and Jay to
get that organized it's uh pretty clear
you know it lays it out well you see the
progression you see the changes you know
it makes sense so I think that's well
one more question just on the equipment
I think um bill was alluding to this too
Eric is that did we decide at the last
budget meeting and what the board of
Selectmen had hoped for that the trailer
will be purchased out of funds from this
year right yes that that that was the
board of Finance decision not that was
not actually the board of selectman's
decision but that's okay well I mean I
had listened to the board of selectmen's
Select uh idea or the way they wanted it
to go and I brought it up at the board
of Finance so thank you for that
correction right and then we did vote on
it vot correct and we've actually
purchased the trailer and it's sitting
at public works at the moment that was
my next question some things get done
quickly that's great well once it get
once all three boards have approved it
you know then it's just a question of me
doing the paperwork so so you know plus
plus we could have they could have sold
it if if we didn't act on it right I
mean it was right there yeah right there
so you like to act fast and not lose
that so yeah we chose to avoid The Debt
Service is what we did that was last
meeting
perfect any other questions on the DPW
heavy
equipment no I guess my last question
would be just out of curiosity I know
you talked about this in the past uh
Eric but you look at that Frontline
spare truck that's like way past it's
usable service it looks like we've had
it for 26 years and usable service 15
like would we ever just like sell that
just to get rid of it and get a little
money for it or is it Way Beyond that or
what's the plan for that truck just out
of curiosity so right now that's our
spare
truck um so we have three trucks the
oldest of our Frontline service trucks
is a 2004 and then the 97 for is an
emergency
spare um the 2004 is a piece of junk
um um we're actually going to get rid of
the 2004 and keep the
97 because the 97 is way more reliable
and way better conditioned than the 2004
and there were a couple reasons for that
first of all um 2004 they didn't want to
spend the money um so they bought a
really cheap plow truck um and that's
cost us um we've put over the life of
that equipment you know we've put like
almost
$130,000 into maintenance of that piece
of equipment um and we're actually it's
actually we've taken it off the road now
um because we blew the power steering uh
unit in the vehicle so so basically the
reason we're keeping the 97 is cuz it's
a lot better than our
2004 um it was an older the older Fords
were all the pre uh pollution equipment
so they had a lot less problems overall
and we have had to spend the money to
completely redo the breakes on it um but
right now that vehicle is fully
functional so that will remain our spare
plow truck even though it's really old
thanks other
questions okay I guess we will move on
to our next agenda item which is the
approval of uh Capital purchase process
form so I think can kind of see what's
uh going on here Eric you're looking for
a form to kind of track these capital
projects um do you want to talk to this
sure so
basically um this wasn't an audit
finding but one of the
recommendations the auditor put in there
is that we produce a form to track
Capital purchases and the reason is
every year they come out they do an
audit and they pull you know 20% or 30%
of our major and say okay give me all
the supporting documentation for this
and we have it all but we've never kept
it in a coherent package
so meeting agendas and things minute
minutes and stuff like that yeah right
so what it takes is I then have to go
back through the board of Selectmen
meetings figure out what month it got
approved make a copy of that do the same
thing for Board of Finance do the same
thing for CIP so instead we have a form
which tracks that and we put a packet
together and it gets kept in the finance
office and next year when we they ask
for that we just pull out the packet
hand them the packet and go um and make
everybody's life easier so that was an
easy audit
recommendation um this I think
should essentially outline all the
players so that we we say you know what
type of capital expense it is what we
based the approval on what board
approved it and when when I signed it
and out it goes
so my my comment on the on the form
itself is is just generally that there's
no place to put the actual definition of
the project
there um so you want to come up with
something there I mean it's fine I me I
think that the other fields of data are
appropriate okay um you know you I don't
think you really need anything anything
more um you know the public meeting
required yes no and then date you might
want to have date approved or something
like that I guess by Maybe by definition
it's data approved so um so that's
probably fine but I think you other than
just having a place to describe you know
give it a give it a project name and
then give it a little brief description
this project this is to approve the
purchase of a you know trailer for The
you know DPW
[Music]
sure okay I can certainly add that that
makes sense I I just had a quick
question on the approval based on and
what's right underneath that you've got
RFP and like a little line there for I
assume yes no whatever and then State
contract should there is there supposed
to be like a are there supposed to be
two separate things should there be a
spot check check box off or not uh that
that line just looked a little wonky to
me and I I want to make sure that that's
what you're intending yeah you want to
make it clear what's to be filled in
yeah I mean I just assumed if it was an
RFP we would put our RFP number on there
make that easy and we're going to put a
copy of the RFP in the packet if it's a
state contract you know I guess we could
put a thing in there to put the state
contract bid number on if you wanted to
see that um just make it clear by saying
Circle one or something put check box
they should be separated way it was my
my thought because those are things
right yep just so it's clear like when
this when you think about how this would
actually be filled out and then two
years later somebody wants to look at
it you know
absolutely so that it makes sense but
otherwise yeah I think this is a good
form okay I like it okay I can certainly
make those Corrections you want to see
it again next month and whatever I came
up with yeah yes yes okay not a problem
looks good though just a couple extra
things other comments or questions input
on the
form okay I guess we'll go on to item 5C
which is the kerma
budget so I'm bringing this to you
because every year they come back and
tell us what our actual increases are
going to be so we're locked in for a
three-year window with a they give us
basically what our maximum rate increase
year-over-year would be um but we don't
necessarily actually get charged that
it's based on our claims history what um
but basically they're giving us the max
rate increase for both liability uh and
workers come um on the workers comp side
we did have one moderately significant
claim from Public
Works um that wasn't related to an
accident but it was related to somebody
who had a medical
emergency um while he was at work as far
as the the lap
policy uh there was a very significant
Claim by AES that was about
$35,000 related to their plumbing system
so that blew our uh lap rate up um so
those two things combined they're giving
us the max contractual rate increase
they could um but I'd already accounted
for that in the budget so it just means
the budget's not going to go down now
that they've given us the final rate
increase but that's the reason why so so
those two claims kicked us up to their
you know contractual maximum basically
yeah correct correct I'm actually
vaguely surprised that the as plumbing
issue was
covered I'm glad it was uh you know this
not my bailey Wick I I do environmental
claims so it's a little different but I
usually know my way around a liability
policy and I was thinking you know uh
but whatever I'm glad they they helped
with it because obviously it was a you
know immediate
need yep and I just want to comment too
I'm surprised and I don't want to get
into anybody's personal business or even
what a medical emergency was but I've
dealt with Kera a lot too so I'm
surprised that if someone had a medical
emergency at work that wasn't caused by
work that there was a claim against that
I mean I could see where an individual
would want to do that but having it
affect our town rates is shocking to me
having worked with kerma all the time
so I I mean but remember he's on the
town's health insurance plan
so it's built against the town one way
or the other it just makes whether no
but I mean if you have it's just in not
talking if you have a personal health
something whatever like I'm at work and
some health thing happens to me I'm just
going to go through however I'm insured
I'm not going to the town for my
personal you know that's why the town
offers insurance and again I want
everybody to be healthy I'm all about
Wellness so I'm not getting this is
shocking to me so
are you able to I'll look in my packet I
thought I had printed that out um and
it's hard for me to shuffle through so
I'll take a look at that but yeah that's
shocking that someone's personal illness
would affect a Town's
policy so well I mean if you have
somebody that's working in the shop and
has a heart attack if it occurs while
they're working that
is to issue we right no we have things
that happen like that all the time again
I don't want to fight anybody's personal
thing but I could be walking from my car
into my job and I unfortunately have
that happened to me and I it wouldn't be
a work issue at all it would be a
personal health issue and my health
insurance would take care of it so again
I can't wrap my head around your way of
thinking with this but again probably an
off camera thing it it's only because
you're bringing it up as a finance thing
and it's affecting the town's policy is
shocking to me because I've never seen
that happen sure it doesn't matter where
it happens as long as I mean I've had
people get injured at work and have to
go in for surgery and that's you know so
that's all just I don't want to go on
and on about it because I want everybody
to be well but it's pretty surprising to
me and that it at least it in kind of
you're siding with them so you're not
the voice of kind of asking the
questions to determine what made that
happen unless but it's it it's
ultimately it's not for me to
decide it's for kerma to decide whether
that is a legitimate claim yeah so an
employee has the right to submit and I
said that please when you talk it sound
right I do get that and I said I want I
can understand why the employee would do
that but probably want information on
both sides and it looks like Rob knows a
lot about it so I'll defer to him but so
did you get a report back stating Eric
that that particular situation was
covered under Kera kerma made a
determination that that was a covered CL
wow interesting however the only thing
that occurs to me this is Insurance hat
on but I'm not a health insurance guy
but you know the the thing that
ultimately comes to mind is subre uh we
don't know necessarily if Kera will go
subate against the health insurer for
the individual if they did they
shouldn't raise our rates then exactly
that's yeah that's where it gets tricky
and I I'm not an actuary but um yeah
yeah that's where this is where you know
when you make a claim even if it isn't
covered you know it can it can trip some
things so I don't know and I'm I'm Pro
I'm outside my area of expertise but it
it occurs to me that me first blush just
just looking at it I actually had the
same reaction in Joanne had which is
wait a minute you know that's not really
a work comp thing but the work comp
carrier said it was covered
so uh a little weird I work with Kera a
lot I mean I'm involved in
investigations with Kera so I'm I have
experience with this or I wouldn't be
bringing it up so
that's generally speaking insurance
company doesn't go out and go oh yeah
sure we'll cover something that's not
covered so it's a little weird I don't
know I don't know what to do and like I
said I would never you know be upset
that an employee is going to try I just
if they have health insurance I don't
know what the claim would be but anyways
again
interesting thank you for that subtext
that's gonna worri surprising I'm glad
people have health insurance too but um
yeah yep okay other uh questions or
comments okay I guess let's move over to
uh seven uh agenda item seven is our
budget discussion so we had a couple
approval minutes oh I'm sorry you're
right I'm jumping out of time those are
usually at the end so meeting minutes
for February 28
2024 um be looking for for somebody to
make a motion to approve those meeting
minutes I'll go ahead oh go
ahead I'd makeing motion to approvement
as submitted okay second Rob any
discussion all in favor say I I any
opposed any
extensions
okay so we will move on to the next
agenda item and that is the approval of
the meeting minutes for I'm sorry I
should have called them out but March
13th these a separate agenda item this
is the March 13th meeting minutes
anybody want to make a motion to
approve that's the special budget
meeting Workshop I make motion to
approve the March 13
2024 special budget meeting minutes okay
in a
second Louise seconds thank you all
right any
discussion all those in favor say I
I any
against any
extensions okay very good thank you now
we can move on to agenda item seven
which is the budget discussion we have
three subtopics listed here the first is
the AES gymnasium
floor uh is this one that Louise wanted
to add Lou you had a question on that
you wanted to add that end for
discussion
yeah get your
mute you still
muted okay that's better yeah I was just
curious I had given a um a
question back a couple weeks ago and I
was just kind of curious why we're doing
the entire thing and we're not splitting
it with
AES because I know we use it and AES
uses the floor as well so is this going
to be a continual
thing I would guess so I you know the
kind of the the
running philosophy we've had regarding
the
gym um the gym work that's been done is
that a the town's going to pay for it
one way or the other and B uh a lot of
the activities that occur within the gym
though by no means all but a lot of the
activities are Town related activities
so the wreck leagues the town meetings
the you know few other things that
happened there I don't really know
exactly all goes on there but that's
that's kind of been something that's
been championed by the rec commission so
that's that's where this this particular
uh request is coming from and actually
Brian you're on that so you you might
want to have a you I don't if you have
anything to add to that but that's
really my understanding and that's why
you know we we did this for the seating
um if a request to help support the
refund the refinishing of the floor and
also to replace some of the fans so all
three of those I think fit under that
rubric that you know we're we're trying
to basically support the infrastructure
that is uh partially used by the town
outside of school activities
so liability wise something were to
happen there is the town on the hook for
that or is this the AES on the hook for
that for which sorry I didn't catch that
is it the town or the AES on the hook if
there's any liability
issue it doesn't actually matter in the
sense that the town pays 100% of the
insurance bills for the town the school
does not pay into the insurance
um we as a Town Fund on our side all of
the kma
bills um so you know the only thing they
pay for is the chubs Rider policy that
covers the oil tanks the inground oil
tanks at the elementary school
everything else the town assumes
so okay they have inground oil tanks
yes how old are they old
W they why maintain Insurance on
them
okay maybe we could talk about that at
some point maybe not now but that's a
big flag for me just based on what I do
for work uh depending on on their age
and what composition those tanks are do
you know what they're made out of Eric
off the top of your head nope I don't
because if they're fiberglass tanks the
new tanks are fiberglass the old tanks
are sing steel they're
B but yeah but they just don't like okay
we'll talk about that some other time
Eric I'd like to maybe have a sidebar on
that at some point because that scares
me it's very scary if that had a leak
that that's like this is my point it
doesn't take much and you don't know
because okay in the course of my career
I've had a bajillion tank clams and the
thing is underground storage tanks with
oil in them when they start to leak you
barely know it it's such a small slow
thing you get a pin hole it a little bit
dribbles out and the next thing you know
it's gone on for years and you have a
whole plume coming off of it and only
when it gets really bad do you notice oh
wait a minute the the level in the tank
is low or we're getting water in the
furnace the things that start to happen
when things get really mixed up in there
by that point you have a disaster on
your yeah have a huge EXC lot of
hazardous Phil right so it it it becomes
a it can be it depends on the scenario
and it's not like we don't know how to
clean up oil leaks but the the point is
these things can spiral very quickly and
a modern day liability policy I don't
know what we have for our entire
insurance program uh I tried to stay out
of it because I work for insurance
company but you know it the modern day
liability policies exclude pollution So
you you're in a situation where if you
have this old tank in the ground and it
rots out on you it rusts out on you
because it's been in the ground for 15
20 however many years especially if it's
sitting in the water table you got a
real problem on your hands so that one I
had no idea that we still have stuff
buried in this town uh you want it
indoors you do not want that in the in
the ground and so sooner rather than
later I don't even depending on the age
of the tanks and the composition thereof
that's another thing to put on their
Capital list to get the the heck out of
that get those things out of the ground
because the longer you wait the more you
recording disaster I I agree 100 perc I
I've had some experience of that too Rob
in
disaster so we should find that
out let's put that on the agenda for
next meeting maybe we can have somebody
I don't know if somebody from school
needs to represent or give us a report
on
that um but I think that that point is
sooner we start talking about better off
we'll be planning installation date
composition you know that sort of thing
I mean if they're single wall tanks
which are really the old ones I'm hoping
they're not but if they are good God if
they're fiberglass tanks no problem okay
I'm not gonna freak but you know if
they're the older tanks or even a double
wall steel I I'm not quite sure what the
DAT of installation is and so what sort
of they what would they what they would
have been but in my my claimes
experience the number of times I've seen
this scenario occur oh yeah they've been
in the ground forever you know we just
didn't think about it and then it's you
know oil's bubbling out of the ground
it's not a good story and it's not
something I want to see happen at the
school so let's maybe nail that down you
know when I when I was an energy auditor
one of the first houses I audited I
audited because they were complaining
that they had excessive oil usage and I
looked at their oil usage and I looked
at what they had for in what their Phill
history was and I said your burner can't
possibly burn that much oil um where's
your line right through the concrete
corroded um the end result of that
solution was they they cut out the
entire slab of the basement took out a
wall brought in a mini excavator and
excavated down to
bedrock um in the foundation it was a
you know a couple hundred, repair of a
residential house it was ugly and and
that's not even the worst case scenario
I I could I could tell War Stories but
I'm not going to take up the whole
meeting with it the the point is let's
let's get some more info and before we
lose our minds let's get some more
information then we'll we'll talk about
it again that's going to vastly change
priorities but it's interesting that you
two and I'm glad this is why I like to
learn from just the looks on both of
your faces Bill and you I'm surprised it
hasn't be and and Mar whoever knows
about it I'm not trying to leave anybody
I just didn't know I didn't know they
had an underground tank I had no idea
right and no good to bring it to the
Forefront before things happen when you
have old infrastructure it's one of
these things you kind of have to go
through and think about it and that one
is a prime example used to be that was
the standard operating procedure every
house every place heating oil tank sure
out back under the ground terrible idea
you used to drain your engine oil your
driveway
too all right Circle back to oh thank
you for that I'm circling back to the
floor just for a second so I know we're
talk I think we should get back on topic
here I think we apologies sorry about
the no no no it's abely the right good
thing to add up you know to to bring up
I think need to get back to the agenda
yeah no that was good to know um just
are we considering this because they're
bringing it Forward I know we have some
quotes are we thinking we're going to
find money like leftover money this year
is that what we're trying to do with
this they're not thinking of adding
these totals to the dollar amount of the
budget that's already been presented I
guess that's my
question or for the Jim floor you know
since they have the quotes
and it's something that they want to do
and they brought it forward we know we
had the safety issues with the um
bleachers last year and then we found
the money so I'm just wondering at what
status are
we were requesting to refinish and
repaint and they would love to so I'm
just wondering where in the cycle they
want us to consider this is this with if
we're lucky enough to have leftover
money in this year's budget or or does
anybody know
that or are we we're not adding it to
the total of the budget we already have
I wouldn't think we can do
that and but I mean I would think if
anything we would do this through the
building maintenance fund it' be
typically right Eric I mean do you know
kind of what the intention is here so
the board of Selectmen has identified
that as one of the key priorities for
the building maintenance fund so
presuming that fund gets funded as it's
in the budget there is enough to do that
so that's that's essentially currently
budgeted it's not additional money um
the board of
Selectmen did ask that at the same time
we do that they they
repair the overhead fans that are in the
gymn
gymnasium because um anytime you have a
super tall building Heat Rises and you
get a a significant temperature
stratification and the old build the
building was designed initially to have
fans to push that heat down to ground
level so you didn't have to to run the
heating system as much but they've
elected not to turn the fans on because
they're too noisy um and the old fans
weren't really all that effective so the
question is do we at the same time spend
the money to replace the fans because it
makes sense right you don't want to just
spend $330,000 on a new gym floor and
then move a bunch of heavy equipment
onto there to install big fans so their
suggestion is to do both projects at
once it would add approximately $10,000
to the
cost that combined that will take a
pretty big hit of the money we have in
the building maintenance fund um so we
will have to to shift some other
priorities but that's okay um we can do
it that answer your question yes yes
and uh so you're saying the 10 I don't I
didn't print the the
page yeah I think if I could ask Eric
for some clarification so they're asking
for us to uh there's they want to choose
the uh quote from New England Sports
floor which is about a 22,000 $23,000
quote there an additional quote for
$6,000 for fans it it's not clear from
this letter but I presume that that's
where the 30,000 comes from no that's
actually part of that is there's some
additional costs that are going to be uh
you know engendered because when you get
a floor sander to do a gymnasium floor
those are really large three-phase
Sanders and they all start with the
assumption that we have three-phase
power in the gym we don't so in addition
to the quote they're doing two things
asking that we use a water-based finish
not an oil-based finish because
ultimately they do work a little better
um but they're more expensive because
they take more quotes So that increases
the price and we're going to have to
supply a three-phase generator um as
part of the project and have uh spent
some money with the electrician to wire
it so they were assuming that the final
cost to refinish the floor was going to
be up to
$330,000 which is why CIP approved that
the board of selectman in addition wants
to spend around
$6,000 uh to buy the fans and have
Lenco um you know install them the in
installation shouldn't be expensive
other than they will have to buy you
know bring in a lift they will probably
have to rent a lift because I don't
think Lenco has a truck mounted lift but
I don't want them driving that on the
gym Flor so are we thinking time frame
is if this was
approved in the summer when the students
aren't there is that yes what we're
targeting have everything in front of me
and it sounds like it would be in the
next fiscal year and therefore the part
of this budget for the with the building
maintenance fund right not additional
funding right what he said was it's in
our current right budget request right
Eric am I misunderstanding that or no
correct it is if the budget as approved
as before you right now goes through
that project is basically funded as part
of the building maintenance
fund so am I correct in assuming that we
don't have to approve it right right now
we're just going to be hopeful that we
can do it I mean I unless I think I
think it's
approved as part of the budget at least
the funding would be right right the
fund okay the funding and we could
certainly approve we could I I suppose
we could make a motion for approval to
spend the money predicated on the idea
that the um budget passes as in its
current format for the building
maintenance fund mark That's what I was
leading to because
if and that's fine that's what I kind of
want to do because if it doesn't pass in
the same way it is we still could
allocate you know we could move funds
around if we thought this was a safety
issue you know we are allowed as a board
in Eric whoever wants to answer this
question you know if we feel this is a
safety issue something that really has
to get done well then we'd just have to
take something from somewhere else and
say well this is a big priority for the
town just like you do in your house old
well we're going to do this this year
and then something else is going to have
to I mean or is that the way we go into
this right we could approve it as long
as everything passes and then
everything's hunky dory but if it
doesn't and we think this is an urgent
thing then we still want to make sure it
happens right yeah you know yeah so I
think brought to us as it needs to
happen sorry Mark and I I get it I take
safety
seriously yeah so I think the the
funding will come up just as part of our
normal budget approval process um as to
whether we just approve them moving
forward with the expenditure we can do
that but obviously that's kind of
dependent upon the funding so we can
make it continues on the the funding you
know the budget passing with the you
know
sufficient you know Building Maintenance
fund
additions yeah I mean you could you
could do a motion and just say that
you'll expend this this project out of
the building maintenance fund and leave
it generic and if we get through all the
HVAC updates in the town hall and the
fire department and get refunded by loow
sipp and fast enough we'll do it in this
budget cycle if not we'll do it next
budget cycle um but July 1 is only right
after school starts so it does
it almost doesn't
matter but is this a safety issue is
that why we're being I I want to like
you said oh we can maybe do it this year
and next I want to take it 100% serious
this is being brought to us that they
want this done this is a saf is it
because of a safety issue is there
pieces coming up on the floor or just
because we're trying to you know
I there is a tripping issue that there
that I thought I heard that thank you
because it was like wavy from all the 44
years of coating it yeah some spots so
they have PE in there all the time that
could be a hazard and uh you know we had
the Easter egg hunt over the weekend so
that could have been potential Hazard so
I don't know um yeah thank you no I
thought that I had heard something that
there was some safety involved with it
too so I I doubt it has anything to do
with it but last year by now 10-year-old
utterly face planted in that gym she was
running across the floor just wiped out
took a header concussion whole nine so
yeah yeah but that's Megan she could do
that anywhere so I'm not saying that
right all I'm saying is that's your
that's your worry right is that get
really hurt yeah just to point out too
that you know as it states in the in the
uh in the request letter is fish floor
is 46 years old
yeah it it's
time right and that's why the
information is good because we want to
make our decisions like what's the
priority now you know okay we wanted to
do this but now we've got a pivot and
now we might have to Pivot because of
what you guys were saying about the
underground tanks
like I'm not saying anything I'm just
saying that this I take this seriously
and that's why I ask the questions like
when I'm making decisions which you know
which is going to stack up well
something else can wait because that's a
that's a want not a need or something so
than
that's all we're funded for now um if we
we proceed with this so that's a good
thing
yeah anybody like to make a motion
regarding this item um real quick do I
need to abstain since I'm in the rec
commission
or I don't say that again do you
need all right I don't think so I don't
think there's any kind of conflict of
interest and you certainly are in a good
position to understand the issue I'll
make the motion then to uh approve the
uh gymnasium floor and the fans for
$30,000 I'll second
it I I actually think the bill if you
improve it approve it with the fans is
going to be an excess of $30,000 yeah so
that's Eric was explaining the 30,000
for the floor finishing and additional
services so there's about another $6,500
for
fans just approved like a
$37,000 package so, installation
so I would say 40,000 is probably a more
re
realistic estimate by the time you do
that entire project okay okay okay you
want to State the uh motion Brian sure I
would like to make a motion to approve
the gymnasium floor as Andover
Elementary School and the gymnasium fans
for
$40,000 wait did we say 40 yes 40,000 40
40, all right perfect okay have a second
my second okay Rob seconds do we you
have any further
discussion okay hearing none we'll take
a vote all those in favor say
I all those
opposed any
extensions okay thank you the motion
passes the next item then is we kind of
combine two items there but the item 7c
which is the welcome to Andover sign you
have a nice little graphic pictorial in
your uh packet now Eric we Vis we we
discussed this at one point and I can't
it was a second one that we decided to
to fund it was it was funded last year
all right let me explain and then you
can shoot holes in it proceed with your
explanation I'm not trying to sway you
one way or the other this is not so last
year the the EDC has tried for many
years to fund welcome to Andover signs
they generally continually shot down um
last year the board of Selectmen agreed
to fund one sign um which were're pretty
close to signing a contract
on then the economic development
commission went back to CIP and said
well you know you funded the last one
out of last year's budget you should
fund the second one out of the next
budget and um CIP
agreed that that was a legitimate and
should be a
fundable you know fundable expense so
and they referred it back to board of
Finance um to see whether you would
agree with that um this is not budgeted
so I'm I'm going to tell you that
straight out it's only you know another
$4,200 um so you could add it to the
budget or you could I guess
try to find somewhere else to but if we
are going to put up two it would be
smart to have them have the guy build
both of them at the same time um and
just tell them you know we're budgeting
one for this year and one for next year
so don't be expecting money for the
second one until after July 1 um which
they would do if Board of Finance
decided you wanted to fund it and Robert
was on the CIP so he can probably walk
you through the logic for that but that
is what that is so this is not a
budgeted expense I'm not saying it
wouldn't be possible to find the money
somewhere um but that that is the
request no we could and just for the
record we do not have a a firm budget so
we could always add $4,000 to some line
item to cover
it and I think that was our thought at
CIP just as Eric mentioned you can kind
of have our prior funding takes care of
sign number one and then we put
something in this year's budget and
right after when July hits we can you
know fund this you know pay for the
second sign the only other thing that
came up with CIP and Eric I know you
remember this
was whether you know there was a little
minor installation deta detail that Jay
brought up that you know we were going
to go back to the contractor I don't
know if that's happened uh but there was
going to be a little bit of discussion
about how deep to bury it and whatnot
but other than I don't think it was
something we anticipated that would
affect the project cost or affect it
dramatically so my thought be if we do
add this to this year's budget to put
like
4,500 uh just to be sure uh because I
think it's 4250 is the
request right that's that's what they
gave the town for an install yeah
probably to make sense to nickel and
diam they off although I would where
where did we fund the last purchase out
of Eric we pay that out of the building
maintenance fund we did we did so we
would just I mean we could just add
4,500 to the building maintenance fund
uh so the sign number two could go in
that would be my thought and my gut
reaction to all of this I mean CIP
approved it we agreed with the idea
seems fine uh it's literally just the
same sign you know number two
where and I think that's it right I
don't think Elaine's coming back for a
third sign is
she I hope not now there was two one was
gonna be down by the old dog pound is
that correct and the other one was gonna
be up somewhere on 316 Eric isn't that
what we said uh one of them will be
across that was kind of strange that was
great well who did that I didn't do that
did I miss you pushed a button
and I'm
not anyway okay so I'm looking at
spreadsheets I missed something good go
ahead Board of Selectmen has gone back
and forth multiple times about where
they would allow the first sign to be
put in they made a decision to do it on
that little piece of town property uh
right next to over and over um so that
is where the first sign is going in uh I
don't think they have read on a location
for the second sign they will have to
argue with the EDC over sign location if
it gets
approved uh Eric wasn't I remember at
CIP maybe this maybe I thought this was
done and I guess it's not done I thought
the second sign idea was at the end of
um shotty
Mill I think that was one of the
locations that was considered but I
don't think the board of Selectmen has
bless any second location yet okay they
tend to citate on that for a while
before they make decisions um and just
for a little context for this discussion
so our 2023 2024 budget line item for
the building maintenance fund was
$18,000 the 2024 2025 proposed budget
line item is
$100,000 so we're we're
down um from last year in the current
proposed budget so if we going to add
something in I would suggest we just
round it up to the $1,000 amount we
could do
$105,000 right don't have to decide
tonight but we certainly could um if
somebody wants to to make a motion to
follow up on that or we can I just want
to comment yep all I was gonna say is we
haven't
even you know I have a feeling we're
going to be having debating on the the
budget we haven't even really gotten
into any of that stuff yet so it's hard
to to make the decision tonight based on
just all the things that are going to go
forward it's not a lot of money it's
just that because I listened to all as
you guys know I tell you that it took
forever to even come up with when they
want the sign so when I was at in all
the debates and I'm so happy for Elaine
that this has happened she's put a lot
of effort and time into it but I guess I
missed the I go to all these meetings so
was it just at CIP that they decided
let's go for a second sign because that
I didn't hear at all that was last week
join that literally just happened gotcha
so and and I know Elaine had mentioned
in the past they want two signs and of
course that does all make sense if
you're doing it just get it done if it's
4,000 but I'm not willing to add money
to the budget yet when we I I'm thinking
maybe can we find it out of another line
and just kind of move it in there and
you know so unless you guys want to add
in and then we end up taking some out as
we debate and talk I that's my only
thought my thought is let's just not
forget it so you know get it on the
agenda in some in in a specific way or
add it to the budget provisionally or
something I I don't know that we want to
approve it right today when we haven't
done our line by line that's what I'm
saying go through the budget which I
like I'm following you I agree uh but I
think ultimately I want to approve it
but um maybe the idea is that we we
heard it we table it for now I just if
we table it I don't want to forget I
don't want to get lost in the shuffle
and we forgot to add $5,000 somewhere
and it doesn't happen
so on the agenda I kept I put a note in
my in the budget file just I'm keeping
track of some line item notes so you
know we can I can bring that up next
time we actually talk about the budget
we I think we we're at the point we need
to start going through line by line by
line uh you know you know just B change
that whole first page you know over
$5,000 or whatever our starting point
you know that's that's my thought Rob
but now we could bring it back bring it
back another meeting with that
notation by by
me all right well if everybody's in
agreement with that then then we can
move on otherwise if you know somebody
could make a motion but otherwise we'll
we'll move on I have a question Lise is
there any
cost Effectiveness to doing both of them
at the same
time
no
yeah if we did them both at the same
time they'll do them both for the same
cost I don't necessarily know if we came
back in the year we whether we' get the
same cost or not right um you know and
are they going to look identical if
they're made different timeses that's
the concern I would have now right so I
mean I would say th you like the idea
and you're willing to fund it or you
don't you know you're not really
interested in it you don't do it um well
we already made the decision we're going
to wait on it
right we didn't vote on that right we
just right we're gonna we're gonna still
talk about it and then once we hit our
line by line stuffs I guess or whatever
yeah
okay okay further comments or
questions okay hearing none I guess
we'll move on to agenda item 8 which is
the administrator's report
Eric okay um I'm just going to go over
the stuff that's uh actively Board of
Finance related um so we did submit a
grant um to lsip for the route 316
connectivity project um I've been told
unofficially that we will get that um I
have not been told officially that but
um that's around a $2.9 million Grant so
that would be super cool if we get it um
still an awful lot of work that would
have to happen before we get to
construction so I wouldn't think you're
going to see any excavators in motion
for at least a couple of years but at
least the funding source is secure um
probably um what's what's the concept
for the work to be done there Eric do we
have a concept in design at all
preliminary yeah we do basically it will
be a multi-use pathway that runs from
the town hall the school down the road
down along Route 316 to Cider Mill Road
um then goes down Cider Mill Road and
then picks up another pathway that runs
down 316 and it makes a connection onto
the rail trail just before you get to
the bridge right um the problem is is
that even though it's a fairly short
path it is an incredibly expensive thing
to build because it's going to be a
couple of bridges in an elevated section
uh getting over a wetland so it's
just um you know um but it fits right in
the center of what that application is
for um and it's also the only project
really that the town could try to fund
through that particular budget or that
particular Grant
program um because the other alternative
for that is a straight road work project
but we actually don't have any road
roads that really qualify because we're
just to rural so um and I've made a
number of attempts to get do to upgrade
some of our roads to quote unquote be
major collectors so I could fund
projects on them but you know every time
I've done it made them do a traffic
study the road they come back to me and
say yeah no still not a major collector
uh pound sand so that's a big Grant um
we also submitted a wreck Trails Grant
kind of as a backup to design a second
an alternative Trail if the lsip grant
didn't get funded I mean my gut tells me
we're not going to get that funded even
though it's a really good idea um recck
Trails grants are incredibly over
programmed um and they're very hard to
get so far if this one fails I will be
over for for trying to get money out of
the wck Trails program um so but you
know you got to keep trying um we also
submitted a really little Grant
something called a micro Grant to the
Department of
Transportation to fund a little Bike
Share program for the Town um if we get
it it will be fully funded so it won't
be anything that requires
taxation I have no idea whether we'll
get it or not but it was worth the
application um the next major Grant
we're going after is something called
The Brick
Grant and my goal for that is to fund
the uh remaining uh to fund a new
generator for the municipal complex so
one that works for the fire department
the new community center and the town
hall um and at the same time I'm gonna
try to PO put as part of that same Grant
the money to finish off the community
center so it can function as an
emergency
shelter um the the problem is those
grants are really heavily weighted
towards distressed community
so the work around is to submit it
through our Congressional or basically
our state senator so we are working with
Murphy's office on submitting that as a
legislative appropriation at the federal
level um so that's not something an
Avenue the town has tried
before um so um and it it's still
competitive but it's a lot less
competitive to do it that way I've been
told flat out I wouldn't we wouldn't get
the brick Grant if we submitted it
without that so that's where we're going
with that so um if we get that um we
probably wouldn't realistically we
wouldn't have the money for about a year
um but if it saves us you know a couple
hundred thousand dollar um we can spend
a little time to to get that so that's
going on the community center uh is you
know coming along well they're
drywalling it currently so we've passed
most of the major
Milestones um and if you looked at the
front of the building you would see it's
pretty close to the final grades now and
you can kind of see what it's going to
look like and how it's going to lay out
um uh other than that I don't really
have
anything um other than I did we were in
discussion today with with Jed Larson
from the Planning and Zoning commission
and the town
planner um most of you know the town uh
has been struggling to get the
contractor in the owner of the gravel
pit that was permitted next to the
extramark on Route Six to properly
finish that off um I suspect the town is
going to start running up legal fees
um forcing him to do that um we've done
everything we could do cheaply um and
we're kind of at loggerhead so I suspect
we're going to end up in a lawsuit with
that individual to force
compliance um but I don't see a lot of
alternative because the abing property
owner is kathern Hutchinson who's
uh um an extremely sharp legal mind and
still a federal judge um and I'm pretty
sure
that you know either we're gonna sue the
owner or Katherine's gonna end up suing
the town so I would rather be the suer
than the suei so that will
affect the budget um you know we may end
up depending on whether that hits this
fiscal year or next fiscal year um we
may end up having to shift money in
around to cover legal
expenses um but that's basically all I
have um unless you have other questions
or concerns for
me true Eric H just a couple quick
questions on the connectivity grant that
we hopefully are going to get uh you
said it was about a $3 million Grant 2.9
I think you said um is that's 100% Grant
it's not there's no match it is 100% it
funds 100% of the construction costs it
does not fund design which is why I
worked really hard to get a legislative
Grant to fund preliminary design and we
should get most of the way through I
don't know whether we'll get to final
design out of the existing pool of money
I have but if not we're going to get
pretty close so if the town has to lay
out any money for the project um it will
be very small it'll be design work okay
yeah um and then the second followup
question I have for you is you mentioned
um you know there's a few little foot
Bridges or whatever that'll have to be
involved this project I it brings to
mind the question of onm costs going
forward once it's
built do we have any sort of sense for
the order of magnitude of what we might
be looking at there because that would
be on us right that's not the states not
going to fund our
onm
uh probably not probably that is on us
although
the so there is
one either one or two bridges that are
potentially would end up being on us
afterward for
maintenance um you know and we are at
basically adding the equivalent of about
.5 miles of a single Lane to our
existing 34 miles 34 and a half miles of
double lane so you can think about this
as roughly a 1% increase in paved
surface so there is maintenance
associated with that although it is
lower for pathway than it is for a road
because it doesn't get the weight of
traffic on you're not GNA have trucks
going on this thing right right um but
the bridge
yes we would be on the hook for the
bridges um we would you know these are
pedestrian style bridges so they are an
order of magnitude cheaper than anything
designed to take the weight of an
automobile um and we would probably be
just buying you know pre-made conx steel
Bridges um and dropping them in on
micropiling so we're not we're not
trying to reinvent the wheel you just
buy those by the length right okay I
just you know just something to think
about you know if this happens when it
happens we're years out probably but it
won't be zero we'll have to build it
into our budgeting for capital or
whatever to keep it up uh presumably so
yep
thanks that was my follow-up question
Eric I know I went to the the meeting
Louise and I attended that meeting that
the one you had about that um and you
had said well this will take clearly
it's a lot of money that will be given
to the town the 2.9 but this will take
Town approval this would be another
meeting thing that has to I know you did
a lot of the preliminary work we went
ahead and submitted the grant but then
it has to come before the town in a
meeting right because it's going to
change the look of the whole in a in a
beautiful way but like we said at the
meeting it involves
like going through people's front yards
and Pathways and all of that so does it
have to be approved at the
meeting or
no my suspicion is it
does
because it's similar to so the two
things that trip requirement for a town
meeting that are related to this would
be if you know let's say they were going
to willing to fund 80% of the
construction and the town was on the
hook for 20 before I could accept the
grant the town would have to agree to
that because it's committing Town funds
okay because we've basically funded
design um and we will have funded
construction I think actually the town
residents will not see any bills for
doing this project I think I've managed
to essentially 100% fund it which kind
of astounds me but um but that's a good
thing well that's a great thing I just
yeah okay so but the other thing that
trips a requirement for a town meeting
is a town meeting is required to accept
a new road and I believe a
multi-use
so and and it's not quite analogous
because usually a new road comes about
because you have a subdivision and they
put in New Roads as part of the
subdivision and then the town has to
officially accept the work and I was
actually looking through the wording in
the charter to see whether it was
something that had to go to a town
meeting
um I think you could argue it either way
but ultimately I would prefer to go to a
town meeting you know when we before we
go to
construction um and go in with the final
plans and say you know this is what
we're looking to approve it's not
costing you money but it does affect
your town so I would hope we go to town
meeting on it right and I don't want to
get S I know we're getting along in our
agenda and all so no thank you for that
I understand that but kind of like Rob
said it will eventually effect like
everything else when we put up the
community center then we're going to
have funding that's going to be part of
budget every year and so it'd be nice to
have that although it's a great get if
you do it it just affects the whole look
of the town too so yeah thank you for
that for the explanation
yep other questions for
Eric okay you got anything else
Eric nope that's it unless you got
questions okay I guess we'll move on to
item nine liaison report so sounded like
you had something to talk
about yeah uh so at
CIP last
week uh we talked about the school
Plumbing now I think I mentioned you
guys a couple times I gotten into this I
don't think I had the full scope of it
I'm not sure the school did at the time
that I talked to you about it they had a
repair done Eric mentioned this in the
context of a you know Insurance claim
but uh in the context of that repair I
think
some I think it came out that there was
more damage than was
realized and there are there are at
least three key things that are wrong
with the plumbing in the oldest section
of the
school that are causing leaks and
whatnot uh one of which is a leak of
sewage which is not good so the
guesstimate and I I understand this to
be a guesstimate a very fuzzy number is
that it could be a $200,000 project give
or
take
um Eric in the in our CIP meeting Eric
mentioned that given the kind of project
it is and the potential scope of it his
gut is that we should get a mechanical
uh Electrical Plumbing engineer to do
kind of a full survey and work plan
which might cost
us oh I forget Eric what was your guest
of it 15K my guess is that's going to be
around 15K but I could be off on that I
mean that's just based on hiring MEPS
before to do something of similar scope
and then once we have that then we'll
know what to what to put out for
RFP what to put out for you know to for
bid because our understanding is that
the contractor who did the spot repair
his his reaction is look I can't give
you a bid to tell you how to fix this
unless I understand the full scope of
the problem and he hasn't done the Deep
dive and maybe not I don't know if he
even feels qualified to do it hence the
MEP solution to
this it sounds like a pretty serious
problem there's 70-year-old cast iron
pipe
involved um so anyway long story short
you're talking something that is
significantly more expensive and also
much more pressing than a parking
lot based on that I think that moves
into number one on the priority list for
AES uh you know and the parking lot you
know you just some some basic I think
they already did it some basic you know
spot repairs and let it ride because
this thing is worse and needs to get
dealt with in a big way you got three
bathrooms apparently that are unusable
at this time in the
school
so step one would
be when we left it last Thursday night
there was a hope that the contractor who
has been helping us with the problem
might be able to get in Monday this week
and look at it Eric did that happen um I
did leave a message for the plumber
today he has not responded to me okay so
know the school put some conditions on
when he could come in to contractors get
busy school has it own issues right so
it hasn't happened basically is the
answer well I don't know whether it's
happened or not frankly um okay I am
following up with it and I'm also
looking for actively looking for an
MEP um and trying to get estimates you
know a couple of different ways One is
using our in-house engineering firm who
has an and does not have a staff MEP but
has an MEP that consults for them um and
getting an estimate from them and then
um looking at a couple local uh
contractors asking them what MEPS you
know they've worked for in the past that
they found successful so my goal right
now is to secure an
MEP figure out what it's going to cost
and get a scope of
a repair scope and a repair
design um and also see whether we can
actually get the original blueprints
from right Celeste was gonna get back to
you on that that's right so yeah that's
the big question is we don't really
know we have a general sense now of the
problem I would not claim that we have
the full we've delineated the full scope
we we you know since the contract went
in there did some repair work we now
know it's worse than we thought
originally when I first heard about this
problem it was described to me as a
$50,000 problem it's now $200,000 maybe
we don't know um well I mean we're
already into it for
$35,000 it's just the initial hit was on
the insurance company because it was an
active sewage spill in a school right so
exactly so now we are in the situation
of you know when we're looking at the
school is is supposed to be working up
their Capital plan this one has to be at
the top of the list you have a sewage
leak you have plumbing problems you have
water damage issues you know that could
come from this thing right now I know
there's been some repair done it may not
be super acute but it's not going to I I
can't imagine it's going to hold uh
given the age and the fact that we've
already have all these problems so
anyway the upshot of the CI meeting was
gosh this has to go at the top of the
list and it has the potential to eat
every dollar that the school of the town
are putting in that fund this
year wow okay well this is why we want
to have these meetings and get the
information was there a school P thank
you Rob was there the school personnel
there to present with you with Celeste
Celeste presented it okay no that's good
I mean that's what we want happen
Shannon was there too but Celeste was
there to to kind of explain from her
perspective and then Eric chimed in with
his understanding situ is is there
school generally agree on the priority
at this point or based on what they know
I know it's early well my understanding
is that the Board of Ed has discussed it
but they haven't formally agreed that
the priority is not the parking lot
anymore um I will throw one other thing
in the mix I did have a discussion with
Jay Tuttle the Public Works
supervisor and I said if you know
because as part of the scope of
repairing that we were going to go after
some catch basins that are having some
issues um so what we did say is that
even if we don't do the parking lot this
year um Public Works will take on the
catch Basin repair um and replace the
Basin thops because a couple of them are
sinking
um and we do have to bring up the grade
um you know so it's the parking lot
works better so that will be done um if
we don't pave it if we do pave it that
will be part of the scope of the
contractor hired if we don't Public
Works we'll take it on and we'll use our
in-house Paving contractor to repave the
areas we cut out to repair the catch
Basin and just those are just the drains
right those are
small yeah
okay so had we known that these
bathrooms weren't just to understand the
problem too because now we're hearing of
all these problems now that we and I
glad we are we want to fix them now that
the ideas of capital program you know
Capital Improvements are happening so
people are looking at these things clo
more closely have we known Eric that
they've had inoperable bathrooms for a
while I know for a while enrollment was
down and there was an area of the school
that was shut down um again huge problem
I'm in definitely exactly why I want
this to work you know that the
emergencies need to be attended to first
but all of a sudden now now we're
getting
into we're going to look at the whole
building and you know see because
that get a design plan I mean I
understand these things I've seen bids
in different and and I get that and it
kind of secondary to what Mark said are
is AES have they been reporting this has
been a huge problem they've wanted this
and is this their priority and I'm not
saying that we have to go with that but
when we get this information this is how
my brain works like it's all of a sudden
we've got all this and I'm definitely
for the emergencies getting taken care
of first yeah sounds like it's a little
preliminary we probably have to get more
information to really go forward for all
of us yeah so
I'm just wondering
um when when you have something like
this is it totally the board of EDS
discretion on whether they fix that or
not or does a town have any say the town
owns the building the safety of this the
students is Town's responsibility I mean
where where does the board of EDS uh
Authority like or in our the town's
Authority where do they cross I I guess
I'm confused about that because you talk
about things like even the oil tank now
that talk about earlier now that that
could take president over in my mind the
The Leaky bathroom because you that
could be millions of dollars to clean
that up I know because I know somebody
that had an oil tank leak I know someone
and it is huge money so I'm I'm just
wondering when it comes to the property
that the town owns and the safety and
the hazards and all that where does the
line get drawn here the board said well
we want a parking lot we don't want to
fix you you know a leaky oil tank or we
don't want to fix you know sewage
problems so I guess I'll shut up now
just ask some I think I'm G gonna guess
sorry
Rob you know ultimately it's got to get
funded right and it's got to get funded
you know kind of with the agreement of
the the taxpayers and the and the you
know and the board of finance and the
board of aded you know and the
administration all working together I
think
so try to get at is who who has the
authority you know to prioritize and
things like that and and actually this
speaks to exactly the issues that
Shannon and I have been trying to work
out in the in the in the that Capital
you know plan uh or rather how to use
the capital funds because the state
statutes and the town Charter say
certain things um the the state statutes
carve out for the Board of Ed of Any
Given Town their
responsibility to for the buildings and
grounds now does that
mean does that include Capital does that
is that do that
maintenance or does that include major
Capital expenditures my read of it her
read of it you know this is part of the
issue actually what does our Charter say
and how does it lay out the the the
responsibilities long story short I mean
ultimately what Mark said is right we're
all just going to have to come together
on this but as to the question of if the
Board of Ed prioritizes in a way that we
think is wrong or what have you what
happens I don't know um open to
interpretation I would say uh and we
could we could talk about uh State
Statute or and Overtown Charter stuff at
some point uh at another time but um
that's exactly the issue actually exact
what what their Bailey Wick is and where
it ends
is a really important question that
feeds into all of these other things
that we're dealing with but this is
exactly why I'm
glad we want to make sure that if an
emergency or a safety like Bill said
Hazard yourself involved too comes for
the children of the town then all bets
are off right and so that's that was the
only reason I asked that question I
wasn't like oh let them decide I'm
trying to trying to honor them like was
it their priority list but also
understanding if it's an emergency we've
got to kind of act I would hope so that
is interesting I meant to answer your
question there actually um I don't this
is slowly kind of developed months and
months ago I think I mentioned it at one
of our meetings that I had had a
conversation with Val and she was
telling me about this bathroom problem
and that was the first time I had
heard um because the school has not had
a capital plan
right we didn't have a document in front
of us to say hey Board of Finance here
are our priorities and we're putting
this at the none of that exist we want
that to exist we want that to come into
being we need that to happen but we
didn't have it so what I got from this
originally was Val just talking my ear
off about various things at the school
and mentioning to me and we have this
problem in the boy bathroom at the time
it was the boy bathroom specifically it
was a Jal that turns out to be like a
third of the problem if that uh it turns
out there's more going on and she didn't
know that at the time either it wasn't
until the contractor came in to I think
investigate and repair that it turns out
wait a minute rro there's this that and
the other and that's what's now been
brought to and and for my as far as I
know our CIP meeting this week was the
first time I heard that the
scope had ballooned like this and Eric I
don't know if you've heard if you you
have a different timeline but that's my
timeline
okay yeah so so basically what happened
is
around in the mid sometime in
December um I was discussing a series of
projects with Rick Wilson because we use
my tech um his Plumbing Service for some
things and they're doing the community
center and he asked me what we were
doing about the elementary school and I
said don't know what you're talking
about and he said ' oh um they have a
really significant problem there they've
got three bathrooms that are closed off
um there's G to end up being a really
expensive repair to get that fixed and
that was the first so I didn't hear
about it from the
school once Rick told me that that issue
was occurring I went back to the school
and said we've asked you multiple times
for a capital plan you're not giving it
to us let's at least have a meeting and
figure out right now what are the issues
you want to get done and what do you you
know because I know you're interested in
the parking lot and I know you have
concerns well I know there's a plumbing
issue in some form or another that has
to be dealt with let's get it all on
paper so I met with Celeste and the
superintendent and Steve Campbell um and
we talked through kind of their laundry
list of things that they had concerns
with and then I asked that Celeste give
it back to me in letter form from the
Board of Ed and say these are the issues
that we anticipate having and that we
know and then I walked to the building
with Steve Campbell because he's the
head you know custodian and asked him
questions about a whole bunch of things
you know and he pointed out some roof
leaks and a bunch of other things we
weren't talking about that are kind of
on his radar um you know as well as some
of the sections of flat roof so you know
they still need to put together a
capital plan for that building so we
understand and you know what we're
really in for but in the short term it
seems like there's two
things that are you know pressing the
first is that there are three sets of
bathrooms in that building boy's
bathroom a girls bathroom and then one
of the sets of teacher bathrooms that
are off limits and the plumbing has been
disconnected because Rick basically said
look all the cast iron Plumbing is
completely rotted out in that original
section of the building he said as far
as he his gut tells him that it all
needs to be
replaced
um you know so the question I had for
him is is this an application where we
can could consider bringing in a company
to just relign them and use a
polyethylene liner and he said he didn't
think there was enough structural left
to that to consider that but you know he
also basically said look this is you
know this is above my pay grate you know
I'm happy to to bid on the work but you
need to bring an engineer in and you
need to develop a scope of work um and a
plan and a set of
schematics um and then then I'm happy to
bid and do the work but until then I'm
not touching it and I suspect most
plumbers will be in that you know that's
a this is a commercial building um it's
old it's going to need prettyy extensive
repairs you need an engineered solution
for it understood no than that gives a
great overview of course anytime you
have an old structure old buildings just
like you went through us with the town
hall and all the repairs you know it
right it's just at what time do you get
the plan when you know do you right I
understand the concept of don't put a
Band-Aid on something and then in in two
months you're going to have to just tear
it all out to make the big repair it's
just at what so thank you I just kind of
wanted the timeline of hearing
complaints or you know how big the
problem had gotten if it had been a real
inconvenience at the school or what's
been going on you know so you said
December and no sounds good I mean this
is why we started the capital plan and
why emergencies need to be attended to
first so I'm good on all of that there's
nothing more we can do on it tonight but
thanks for all the overview yeah so
heads up
everybody
y okay thanks uh
Rob anything else from the board leaz on
reports okay we'll move on to board open
discussion does anybody have anything
specific to bring before the board we
haven't already
discussed I was just gonna say nothing
nothing long I thought and I'm sure you
were going to bring this up too and Eric
usually does at the end you know kind of
to set our tone for our is it next
Wednesday I don't have the calendar we
have another budget Workshop meeting
correct um because we you know we did a
pretty good timeline for tonight so
we'll get ready for that my only request
was going to be um I know Mark if you
agree on this or you think this is too
preliminary obviously we'll be all of us
will be bringing our questions or maybe
items that we want to talk about um a
couple that I'd like to see come before
the board is and I I was trying to open
my spreadsheet on the side I know
there's a couple things that Eric remind
me you know how we said we wanted to
hear from the people so I know that the
town clerk we had done a big thing last
last year and we sign she got a
significant raise you know welld
deserved and we're glad about that I
forget if she had a another big request
so I was at some point maybe at talk to
her that doesn't have to be next week
but is it the regist of Voters Eric
someone
else requested kind of a significant
thing so I was just going to ask to hear
why because I know we significantly
raised them last year too I think it's
because they we have additional voting
days we have to we have to fund them
because of the state requirements right
so I will I will look at it it wasn't
opening for me while I was listening to
other things so if I have any specific
questions I'll get back to that those
two came to mind just to get the
rationale but maybe maybe it's not
needed once I look at it and you know
review
so Mark do you want me to respond so I
did ask the town clerk I told her that
you would probably uh want to speak to
her at the next meeting because I know
you had said in a previous meeting you
wanted to talk to the town clerk so she
is expecting to uh be at the next budget
meeting um which I think is the
thir yes is the third week right um and
I also told Jed Larsson because I know
you some of you had expressed some
significant uh concern about the open
space fund so I thought it appropriate
that you hear directly from the chair of
the Planning and Zoning Commission on
why they think funding that is
appropriate um if you want to talk to
the Reg
at the next meeting I will tell them uh
that they need to be on I will tell you
that let me review it tomorrow you know
unless other people do I'll review the
figures tomorrow and see I thought it
was a significant increase so I was just
gonna because I knew we had
significantly increase them last year
too so right I just try to get it in
there the regist is up
significantly um although remember
because we separate out Revenue and
expenses we are we do have extra Revenue
in from the state to pay for that um but
part of the problem is we are now
required to have early voting you know
instead of one day of voting um like for
the presidential preference primaries
which are going on right now and you can
come vote tomorrow if you want um um I
already voted um but that's really
expensive because instead of Staffing
for one day we're Staffing for five days
and when we get to the actual
presidential elections we will be
Staffing for 15 days instead of for one
day as in the past so it is a lot more
expensive yeah yeah those were my only
thoughts I guess we'll get back into the
budget things
um yeah when we get to that line on them
we should put a notation in you know
like okay this is going up by X but
we're receiving y from the state and
then we can really that's how you
evaluate you know what's the
net than that any other questions for
the board board open
discussion are there anything else
specifically that you want me to have
prepped for you or get you additional
information ahead of time for the next
budget
meeting can we have till Friday to get
that to you that request to you Eric
uh well Friday is technically a holiday
right this is true I will be working the
morning of uh Friday because I have two
commitments but I don't want to work any
longer than I have no no I mean then
I'll try to have if I have any requests
but I mean I know we receive our packets
the day before so I'm just I just need a
little bit of time not always but I mean
I think anything we can get to Eric in
advance even if you don't think about it
until Monday or Tuesday he's just going
to help him prepare a little bit because
we're going to ask him one way or the
other so you know even if he doesn't
have a chance to research it before
Wednesday's meeting it at least gives
him a little bit of heads up so you
know us Sooners better and the only
thing I would say about next week is we
really probably need to start rolling
down through these line by line you know
there's a lot of lines I don't think we
want to spend much time on the ones that
are you know
$500,000 or no change but I think that
the any the significant changes Eric's
already addressed the top 10 but I think
we need to start rolling down and just
make sure we're comfortable with them
and if there's any that are people are
concerned about let's let's try to iron
it out and start start knocking it out
like you know and then you know we've
got to get through this you know it's
it's there's nothing super surprising
we've already talked about the big
changes but we do need to start running
running it down
okay sounds good right um just because
it's board Open disc discussion I don't
know if if uh one idea that I thought we
could look at to generate some more time
potential revenue for the town I don't
know if anybody else saw this but I see
that the town of tand they um I think
it's their Conservation Commission is
now issuing permits to trap Bigfoot for
$10 each and I gotta tell you there's
enough enthusiasts out there that if we
try to set something like that
up see that there's some real
opportunity I like
it throw that one before the board of
Selectmen I think we to added a line
item in the
budget good ones trapping permits so
that's our little joke for the end of
the day yeah all right do anybody have
anything
else if not we will uh our next agenda
item is correspondence I don't have
anybody have any other correspondence we
haven't
discussed public speak looks like we
still do not have any members of the
public in
attendance okay I guess we will
entertain a motion for
adjournment I make a motion to Bill
makes a
motion Louise
seconds any
discussion all those in favor say I I
any
opposed any
abstentions okay thank you very much
folks I appreciate it uh have a good uh
holiday